my audio tape here.
I know.
Sure.
I'm talking to Jim Kerwin here, tape one in San Francisco.
Let me put this over here.
This is the opening of a... This is an opening of a videotape.
It's called The Library of the Future.
It's about the San Francisco Public Library.
It was made in 1988 by Somebody Communications.
It's on the tape.
Had the money already been approved for a library at this point?
No.
You know, we'll watch it, and if you don't mind, I'll take it with me and make a copy of it and return it to you.
And you can feel free to speak out loud as we watch this.
Tell me what particularly... I'll try and keep the comments in the room so you... I want you to have this to look at because it will confirm later in your mind what was desirable and what wasn't for these people to do.
Okay, San Francisco Public Library, so this is a tape, clearly either made by them or for them.
By Davis Community.
About 1,800 hours after a rush hour for most of us.
And there's a great light show in the sky about San Francisco.
Imagine yourself.
Here, here's our man's future.
Hey, who is it?
Nobody's ticket, but you say that.
Yeah.
Wow.
Welcome home, Mr. Taylor.
Environmental service will be here.
No inclusions in security zone 142.
Telecommunication report.
Voice mail, two messages.
Televaccine, one message.
Video test.
International use on screen 3.
Stop report on screen 4.
Why don't you just go up to run down there and be part of this library?
All the policies are stable.
Did not be prepared.
Your report for advanced dynamic systems is due tomorrow.
Today is Monday, November 8, 2001.
Have a good evening.
So you need information on various subjects.
And he's punching stuff now into the...
Find a source.
13 years early in the future.
Specify available services.
Need help?
Yeah.
It is a building designed to last well into the 21st century.
A magnificent structure of glass, steel, and stone, bringing new beauty to the classic Renaissance architecture of Civic Center.
Some stores over 400,000 square feet of usable space
house and disseminate the most important commodity of our century.
Information.
Inside a world-class facility, spacious and bright, the hub of a regional information network, is a knowledgeable world home to the citizens of San Francisco.
There is a knowledge center, talent, preserve, organized, handmade, graphic, and written documents
It is an information center using current technology to produce and collect information that is available from home, in the office, or at the library.
A future robotic voice.
Would you describe it as a robotic voice?
Yes.
It is a communication center.
The nucleus of an information network that can access data from all over the world and distribute it quickly.
But nothing to stop it.
Nothing to swallow it.
This is a noble institution lending the knowledge of the past to the technology of today and tomorrow.
The business and economic development section provides immediate access to valuable information and data.
Within minutes, office computers are online.
It is a new age resource designed to keep San Francisco business one step ahead of the competition.
An expanding children's section.
a discovery center offering knowledge and creativity in a safe, secure environment.
With story hours, comprehensive book correction, creative playtime is in the tools to stimulate and challenge young minds.
The largest children's library on the West Coast offering our children the technology to solve problems
for the future.
They live on computers.
The physical records have catalogued and preserved important city documents in the physical archives.
The history of San Francisco.
The city archives are gone.
Find the information at the fingertips of decision-makers 24 hours a day.
Any Asian or civil rebellion, a unique and historical meeting of Eastern knowledge.
That never happened.
Information and data on the files of the privacy.
I think I say, hey, look, yes, sure, but he's got the work in change.
The card catalog, a partial out-of-date index of library holdings, has been replaced by the online public access catalog, a completely integrated and current listing of all library resources, video tapes, laser discs, microfilm, periodicals, and books.
Through the online public access catalog, any library holding will be located and reserved.
And fiber optic technology allows you to get that information at home, at the office, or at any branch library.
And it will even find materials in other library systems across the country or across the world.
It is a public facility, providing many necessary public services in that district center area.
Oh, we did it again.
All to transmit ideas in a public forum, allowing public participation of neighborhoods.
I'll show you the one.
Community meeting groups where groups of citizens can share their concerns, even when a library is closed.
The literacy project is coordinated by library staff, teaching the skills of weeding, and opens the door to full participation in our modern society.
The Center for the Book, where rare and priceless collections of protective and environmentally controlled rules.
This Center for the Book was to be, they were going to put books under glass.
Because books were going to become a thing of the past, they were going to build a monument to the book.
Making it like a laboratory specimen, so to speak.
Right, right.
When the public found out about it, they went ballistic.
They had to cancel their precious... So if we would just go back a tad, and maybe we can watch that again.
Right there.
...participation in our modern society.
The center for the book, where rare and priceless collections are protecting and environmental controls.
and displayed from public appreciation, image collection, and the Revolute Scholar Program.
Over 2 million books, 12,000 videotapes, document delivery, special programs for seniors and young adults.
Full and complete access to all library services for the blind and handicapped with expanded facilities for the deaf and hearing impaired.
The San Francisco Public Library provides the resources demanded by the information age.
It is the nucleus of an information delivery system dedicated to serving the public.
The primary source of knowledge and achievement at the center of this modern metropolis.
Knowledge, information, communication.
The three elements that will shape our society in the year 2000.
How well we answer the challenge ahead depends on what we do today.
The steps we take now will ensure that we're prepared to meet those challenges.
But while we are firmly rooted in the present, we must always keep an eye on the future.
Well, here you go.
Close to the right, Q-O-N-A-P-I-R.
This was inexpensive.
That's a huge step.
Look at this.
Kenneth Dallas is a librarian following his staff at the library.
Kenneth Dallas is probably a relative kid.
This is all we have here.
for partial underwriting of this program.
I mean, there's nothing illegal about this.
No.
It's worth noting.
All right.
Why don't we stop?
Back it.
Back, back, back, back, back.
All right.
Stop.
Wait.
And what we'll do is... U.S.
Department of Education, under the provisions of the Library Services and Construction Act Title I,
and three, administrative in California by the state librarian.
However, the opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the U.S.
Department of Education or the California State Library, and no official endorsement by the U.S.
Department of Education or the California State Library should be heard.
But this was a publicly funded PR tape, apparently.
Apparently.
No, quite, quite pointedly, I think.
Yeah.
Why is that significant, Davis Communications?
Well, that's just what's, that's who they call for copyright.
Okay.
I don't need to ask anybody's permission right away or anything.
Well, no, I mean, first of all is... And the last poll was regarding the Black Journalist.
Well, Dan, it may only be a year old, but boy, does it have problems.
Channel 7 News has learned that a newly completed audit shows library operations $700,000 in the red.
The fallacial library is an architectural showcase, but the red ink is just part of the trouble.
The more traditional has no place in this library.
The glass and chrome building is flooded with light.
Car catalogs serve as decorative pieces of art, and the cars that once inhabited them have creative wall coverings.
and the computers with internet access are attracting people who have never used the library system before.
We are more popular than the 49ers in the Bronx.
Those crowds are one element straining this high-tech showpiece.
Employees are rarely seen by patrons, but behind the scenes are grappling with mounds of books, which are used often months ago.
And, uh...
College student Jennifer DeLue has heard it before.
And she may not be able to the next time.
With a looming debt, the library may remain severely short-stamped.
The hiring of a new head librarian may be delayed, and purchases of new books may be put on hold.
Although critics say there was never room for them in the first place.
No doubt the building feels spacious enough to accommodate the tens of thousands of patrons that visit the library each week.
Yet librarians say actual shelf space for books is so puntier that according to one estimate, over a third of the circulating collection remains in storage.
Hundreds of thousands of books have already been given or thrown away.
and critics charge with so little shelf space, that trend will continue.
That may be, but no matter how troubled, San Francisco's Library of the Future may be giving younger patrons just that, the future.
But still, the fact remains, library operations are deeply in debt, as we discover to the tune of $700,000.
Mayor Willie Brown has been briefed on the preliminary findings of the new audit.
Mayor Willie Brown bought off Channel 7, ABC World News tonight, which had real figures, and had pictures of Brooks Hall to go with it.
For this report here, one prior.
And so what happened was they tanked it.
Yes.
Which we have the records of.
Yeah.
He or she aggressively after he returned from his trip to Philadelphia next week.
Ben?
While he was in Philadelphia.
Willie.
We sent those photographs after him.
And the Philadelphia Inquirer ran the story.
We take that back to a copy of him in the file.
Because of their situation.
And because they liked the picture of Willie.
So these problems at the library begin the moment this thing opened a year ago?
Pretty much.
When people started looking, decided to leave the library, a strategy was put into place not to hire new people to replace them.
So overtime was put into play, and that's when the bill started out.
That was not it.
Technology is the core of the cost.
They were trying to blame the staff for that.
Well, so if the...
That's why we had the audit.
So does the audit tell us what they spend on technology?
The audit didn't tell us jack shit.
The reason was, it goes back to this, that's what all that correspondence is about.
They did not want to get into digging into what it was really all about.
The administration of the library wants to say, ah, overpaid staff.
That's the reason.
Well, 30% of the staff services only the computers anyway.
And they are some of the highest paid people.
30% of the staff is computers only.
How do you know this, though?
From the library commission.
So the question is, how much of the staff, wait for me now, I'm posing my question.
How much of the staff, how much of the staff?
78% of the staff.
I just finished asking them that at the last library commission.
And Gina said, what Gina said to me, 78% of the staff,
78% of the costs are the staff.
4.5% is book.
7.1% is computers.
So is she telling the truth, or is that accurate?
That's what they're telling her.
Okay.
All right, Mabel's wrong.
Thanks very much for that.
Come here.
Always one more little quick bet here.
Bill, it was hailed as the shining example of how... At the same time, no, this is a later story.
This is about a week later when the audit finally came out.
No, a couple days later, I think.
It should be on.
But how do you know these things are coming on?
Like, you know these reports are coming on.
How did you know they were coming on?
We've been on them like a dirty load.
So they were worried.
Yeah.
What we did was, prior to the audit release, Channel 7...
This is the same channel we just watched before?
Yeah, but Channel 7 initially released that little thing to protect the mayor's ass about when the audit was going to be released, because nobody knew when it was.
It was late, it was late, it was late, it was late.
So when it finally came out, about three days before it came out, I faxed everybody in a known universe with these really clear criticisms of what the audit didn't do.
To my surprise, these people bought what we said, and you're going to see the end result.
They released the audit that night, and these guys went on the air along with Channel 4, which is NBC, and Jeff smacked them, basically saying this was half-assed.
All over the Bay Area should operate, but a $50,000 audit just released a short time ago indicates that other libraries should not make the same mistakes.
As Channel 7's Deborah V. Alone explains, the Fancy U facility has all the bells and whistles, but just can't deliver the basic service.
Return a book to the new main library.
It drops to the basement and joins the crowd.
books sit here for weeks waiting to be reshelled there's no one to do it only five employees work in this sorting room i'm talking about people genuinely making themselves sick trying to keep this building running with not enough people the library commission knows it has problems there's been a hiring freeze since the budget dipped into the red and mayor brown ordered an audit
Tonight, the results came in.
21 recommendations, from hiring new managers, to finding more storage space, to training staff on the computers scattered throughout.
This library is state-of-the-art, packing in twice as many users, but a victim of its own success.
It's not surprising.
The system comes on the boundary.
That was their national mantra.
Victim of its own success.
Only that's not true.
in a very short period of time after a long, long short of not having much time.
Okay, well... Every change that the audit recommends costs money, as much as $3 million, mostly to hire people to get all these books back on the shelves.
I want your fingers to indicate how many books they've loaned out in comparable periods.
Of course, they're going to say, well, it's more than books.
We've got computer hits and all this other stuff.
I'd be curious to know how many books... They have people counters that show numbers of people.
Yeah, but I want to know how many books have been borrowed.
That is one statistic we have not been able to get.
Maybe you'll have more luck.
Have you asked that question?
Yeah.
Didn't get anywhere.
Well, I'm just a journalist here.
I just heard somebody say that they are a victim of their own success.
They made a declarative statement.
So successful, how can we show this?
So fine.
I'll say, really?
Well, how many books have you loaned out?
This year as opposed to the year when you were in the old Maine in the previous year.
We have figures, but they must be given.
We have computers.
Computers tell you how many books you loaned out.
I would be curious to know.
But I'm sure that they will say, well, we don't judge success strictly by computer, by book loans, because we do so many other things.
That's what they're going to say.
And then, you know, fine.
One of the things is that in one of these reports, several people, they have what they call a fill rate.
Fill rate.
This is a national thing.
All libraries do it.
And what it does is attempt to measure customer satisfaction.
The fill rate in the San Francisco Public Library is 37%.
That means that when a person comes to the library, four times out of ten, they're going to find what they look for.
Only four times out of ten.
The other six times, they will not find what they're looking for.
for Brown and the Board of Supervisors to come up with some money.
We will endeavor to make it work for everyone.
Just as the audit has pointed out that there's some issues that are rough and need to be addressed, I think the mayor is going to review that very carefully in the upcoming budget and take steps to fix it.
And fix it fast, because every day 5,000 more books come back, joining the 50,000 waiting in the basement.
Deborah Villalone, Channel 7 News, tonight.
Dashed hopes tonight for the library.
Some parents in the South Bay are vowing to step up their fight against pornography.
Some hunger strike to the great boycott.
I forgot, right?
Who is I, the excellent file?
It's a wonderful model.
Now, this is what?
Register.
For weeks on end, professional movers swarmed over the entire collection of San Francisco's 80-year-old main library.
A million books were on these shelves, some well-thrumped, some gathering dust for years.
The collection, while large, had been disarray for decades.
Books had disappeared.
Others had been thrown away.
Now, at last, the library was on the verge of a new era.
When the movers were finished in early spring, they had transferred every book across Fulton Street to new shelves in a breathtakingly new building.
The distance is short, but the journey is... They just said that they put all one million books in the new library.
I heard a figure of three million, though, at a previous tape.
That's in the whole system.
But in the new Maine, they said they moved all one million books from the old Maine to the new Maine.
There are 37,000 short.
An often neglected library into a marvel for the 21st century.
San Francisco has gone in 10 years from a neglected system to a cutting-edge system in the center.
This building is a bridge from the past to the future.
I don't think there's anyone who got there where they are in life without having to leave a public library.
San Francisco will begin the millennium in the midst of a cultural and civic renaissance.
Visual evidence is all around.
The New Museum of Modern Art dominates the South of Market skyline.
Just across Third Street, a recently opened view of Buena Gardens provides calm and culture against the glorious backdrop of the city.
The Palace of the Legion of Honor has been renovated and included in growing crowds.
And the DeYoung Museum in Golden Gate Park is due for major reconstruction.
City Hall is getting the treatment too following the 1989 earthquake.
The jewel in the crown completing the grand plan for the Civic Center is the building just finished at this site.
The new main library.
In four years it went up and in these images it looks so easy.
But getting to this point was fraught with politics, cultural jealousy, indifference, benign neglect, and incredible determination by a few people that overcame all that.
Fundraisers, activists, architects, librarians, and donors.
The champions were not the politicians who never were quite sure what to do about the library.
It's an intriguing story how this library came to be.
The public library had always been an orphan in the cultural household of San Francisco.
The sophisticated and the well-to-do in this city were generous to the opera, the symphony, and the ballet.
The principal constituency of the public library came from a far different, less affluent strata of society.
Surprisingly, it was a powerful group, able to generate the support that made this building possible.
It included people like Jade Snow Wong,
who long before she became a ceramicist, was the best-selling fifth Chinese daughter.
She grew up poor in Chinatown.
Around 11 years old, I started going to the library.
I never was allowed outside of Chinatown, but going to the library was okay, and I would take out four books every day, meaning I would buy four books, and I would eat a book a day and go back the fifth day and get four more books.
I think I was fascinated because through the books I learned about all the big world outside of San Antonio and the world of mixed views.
Wong and people with similar experiences became the grassroots from which the new library grew.
I don't know.
It's to me the frontier of democracy.
A few libraries.
Everybody, no matter how poor, they have.
But the story of San Francisco's library begins long before Wong's early memory.
Even in its wild gold rush days, San Francisco was a literary town.
The first public library borrowed or rented space for their small collection.
The library, like the city, was on the move.
In 1898, it took over a wing of the new city hall.
In April 1906, earthquake and fire.
I love this stuff.
The city hall was severely damaged by the earthquake.
It took a while for the fire to get to the library.
And once it did, it burned virtually everything that was in the library.
Peter Booth Wiley has written a history of the library and the city.
But from the ashes, the new city grew, determined to enhance its prominence as a cultural center of the West.
A new grandiose library in the Bozart style went up.
in a reborn civic center near the new city hall.
Opened in 1917, the main library at first worked wonderfully.
The monument is a cultural and art.
It is a beautiful building with grand staircases and huge... They're going to talk about how dark and dingy it was.
What they don't tell you is that they painted the skylights black in order to make it more dingy.
Which television station produced this?
Channel 9.
You don't know what they're called.
KQED.
I think I'll call them and find out when it was broadcast.
This was rebroadcast just last week.
That's what we're watching.
I see.
Oh, really?
Yeah.
It was broadcast on National.
Portions of it were on NewsHour with Jim Lehrer.
And portions of it were
Well, do they get into any of the problems here?
Or is this... Yeah.
Copy.
June 22nd.
Here.
June 22.
That was local.
1996.
And July 22nd, 1996, was national.
July what?
22nd.
Same day, the month.
1997.
Sixth.
It will soon become the Asian Art Museum.
Among its admirers is historian and former city librarian, Kevin Scott.
It has a monumental feel of all great libraries that year.
You don't really need any library, do you?
More like a museum.
Well, Spencer, do we need the Mona Lisa?
Do we need the dome under the Capitol?
It'll make a nice museum.
Isn't it a great library?
It's a delightful museum.
It's a spectacular public space.
Single light bulb.
Look at that.
The old Maine, as it's now called, had an aura about it.
Gladys Hanson worked there for 40... Point of interest.
Last year, the library spent $92,000 on light bulbs alone.
Founding the San Francisco History Room.
Today, she runs the Museum of the City of San Francisco.
There's like a barn.
But it was home.
It corrects you.
It made you feel comfortable.
And of course, the military says it's a dress code.
You wore heels and you were dressed and so forth.
I can remember going out in the back and all those big marble floors.
We'd take off our high heels and we'd go with our bare feet to pick up the books, come back, put our heels on again and go out to the public.
The history room still includes wonderful collections of old and rare books.
Librarians mothered volumes from the Middle Ages, the Renaissance, and the Enlightenment.
But for all its collections and affection, there was plenty wrong with what they called the Old Man.
For one thing, it filled up with books by 1943 and became nearly impossible to manage.
The new librarians stopped that.
They're not buying any books.
Librarian Ken Dowling found when he came to work.
It was quite embarrassing to be a person with two master's degrees and a 30-year library director, and I couldn't find a book in the Old Main Library because of the way it was organized and laid out.
Mr. Dowling, because of that, decided to create his own filing system.
He did away with the Dewey Decimal System and he created something called Leveled Access, which was to jam everything together so that he had fewer categories to bother with.
It created a massive, massive nightmare, which they are now trying to unravel.
Both funds to even care for the facility, the lighting in there apparently was extremely dark, and the walls were unpainted and very dreary, and the place had a feeling of abandonment about it.
The library was an embarrassment to the city that prided itself on culture.
In the 1950s, the Chronicle ran an expose on the disgraceful condition, written by Hale Chandler.
In San Francisco, there was a feeling of frustration.
Politicians didn't allocate enough money to buy books, catalog them quickly, and hire trained professional librarians to manage the system.
And the library couldn't compete with music and arts for private funds.
Over the next 40 years,
succession of librarians and their supporters tried to bring order to the chaos.
Kevin Starr marched with costumed Minutemen to draw up support for more funds.
But politicians, perennially faced with budget shortfalls, saw the library as vulnerable.
Not just the main library, but the branches, too.
Well, we all thought him was a good guy, and I don't know
I think he's a little both.
In other words, he's got a political agenda to maintain and stay.
He was approached about taking it over after Dallin when he passed.
So that's a little bit.
Yes.
But he is, in his own right, a very well-thought-of librarian.
Which is a hell of a highly regarded historian.
Yeah.
But some of the things that went on after, he's one of the people that didn't want to build a new building.
Really?
Yeah, they tried to get him to, and that's why he had to, I think that's the reason he was no longer the city librarian, because he refused to outright.
He was a librarian then, and they brought Gallim in supposedly just to build this new building.
And would it have to have been, because Kevin Starr said no.
Because he saw no reason to tear the building down, or desert the building, just to build a new one.
I mean, it didn't make any sense.
Did he say something so slow?
that there was a lot of pressure on me to consolidate.
And the special nature of San Francisco is such that I held the line and I did not close branches.
So the library community throughout the state began to develop its political expertise, began to learn to lobby, began to learn to get its message out to the community, and that made it much more difficult for an elected official, for a mayor, to come in and to arbitrarily cut a budget.
The library had developed a constituency of its own.
Among the devotees were people like Dorothy Bryant,
who grew up in a poor Italian-American family in the Mission District and later became a best-selling novel.
It was the 30s.
There were no paperback books.
There were no books.
There was no money to buy books.
And as soon as I learned to read, boy, I was up here every day hanging out in this room.
So it's a very special feeling to come here.
What were the librarians like?
Oh, they were very much like the stereotypical librarian who said, hi.
kept everything still, and they were all lost.
They were not Italian-Americans as I was.
The new library has mobbed children screaming and yelling.
They were very kind.
The branches in the residential neighborhood still evoke the most loyalty.
They have become like the distance they are in centers of ethnic diversity.
First stop for immigrants trying to maintain their own cultures and learn a new one.
Many of the city's new residents seek out books in their native languages.
The branches supply them and try to cater... Not anymore.
This year, just for your own information, you should know, no foreign language books have been purchased.
So everything about that... You don't know...
While the 26 branches tried with rather skimpy collections to meet the needs of the neighborhood, the main library remained the brains of the system, backing up the branches, directing them, and setting the tone.
It was the main that guarded the valuable collection, like the music room's incredible treasure trove of sheet music, part of America's pop culture.
But even the five collections could erase the fact that the main library was in bad shape and was ignored in first aid.
That was evident to San Francisco philanthropist Marjorie Stern and her fellow fundraisers, Margaret Mayer and Mary Louise Stonk.
My family, my father had a great library, which went to Stanford because he didn't think that Stanford School was sitting at rare books properly.
And so he got married.
And he was very upset with the committee that it didn't do more.
So that was the reason I got involved, really.
Stern.
friends with many of the city's wealthy and powerful, decided to lead the fight to build a new library, a great library.
And it was a fight.
We had a target, which was the new main library.
We had to make people feel that it was a possibility.
Cincinnati, Cleveland.
One of the things about Ms.
Stern, so you know, every politician runs for office, a dog catcher up,
Five bucks.
And five bucks to $50,000 gets from Stern.
Really?
Just so that all her phone calls are returned.
Absolutely.
So she became this, over many years, this woman has become this powerhouse.
And this was her driving passion, was to have a new library.
And so that's where that all came from.
And she did say that her daddy was a bibliophile.
I wonder if she was at my talk at the Roxburgh Club.
She's the kind of person that would have been there.
We have several wannabes here that aren't.
We have a James Haas who runs the Civic thing downtown.
One not related to the Haases that own Levi Strauss.
Miss Stern is not related to the Sterns.
She is a standalone.
And in both cases... But she's wealthy enough already.
Wealthy enough, yes.
Philadelphia, our library town.
That was a symphony opera and ballet town.
That's where she comes.
What are you fighting against?
We didn't just socialize.
That's me and Meg, I guess.
Yeah, and too many things begging attention, you know.
The people who could afford to make something happen, many of them assume the library is for poor people.
It's not for us.
We can afford to buy books.
So it was in a different category.
The problem was who would pay for a new library?
The San Francisco Public Library would proceed primarily as a municipal service rather than a cultural institution.
And so there's an reluctance for people to raise money for government.
After all, we gave it the office.
We gave it tax time.
A bond issue would be needed.
But first, Stern had to fight to keep the site envisioned for the new library.
It was across Fulton Street from the Old Main with a small city planning department building that had gone up as a USO headquarters in World War II.
Supporters of Cochrane wanted that site for a symphony hall.
So as widely people perceived the Performing Arts Center, people was coming along and essentially stealing their sights.
It was a pretty intense fight.
It was a very intense fight, and it didn't look good for a long time.
Like this, right in this room.
We would just sit down and have it out.
with all these different groups and everyone's colliding and then seeing where they're there.
It's a political process.
It really is.
Tough negotiations by Stern and her friends ensured that the library won back dollars.
Once cleared, the site for the new library oozed history.
Archaeologists pored over what had been the ceremonial heart of the city in the last century.
They found evidence of the cemetery that was here before 1870.
and the old city hall and jail, which perished in the earthquake and fire.
Building a library here required a lot of money, and getting a bond issue about was a big hurdle.
Even librarian Kevin Starr felt there wasn't enough public or political support.
Today he admits he was short-sighted.
I didn't think that we could jump from one of the most neglected public library systems in the nation
and automatically overnight become one of the most, one of the best finances.
I thought there'd be a little difficulty in between.
And being a prudent San Franciscan, I thought that the recycling of this heritage building would be the best alternative.
Now, I presented that to the commission, and the commission said, no, that's not what we want.
We want a new building.
And therefore, Roma, La Cuccia, Causa, Sanita, Rome has spoken.
The cause is finished.
The commission makes policy.
I kept my mouth shut from that point on.
Almost everybody...
Love libraries.
It's an American institution.
With Ben Franklin and Thomas Jefferson on, everyone loved libraries.
Banking on that, Steve Coulter, president of the Library Commission, led the campaign for $110.5 million in bonds.
Proposition A, which finally got on the ballot in 1988.
You talk about the constituency of the public libraries.
You're talking about the average person.
A lot of working class people, regular Americans.
But Coulter says some opposition sprung up from strange bedfellers, business interests and neighborhood activists.
The business community was somewhat irritated because of the closure of the downtown business branch.
Some of the neighborhood activists were somewhat skeptical of the new name.
They saw that as, you know, money going downtown wasn't in a specific neighborhood.
To everyone's surprise, the bond issue passed.
It wasn't even close.
78% of the voters in unheard of margin for San Francisco voted yes.
It was a glorious day for Marjorie Stern and friends in 1992 when construction got underway.
The plans were grandiose and politicians who had a marginal role in the new building were happy to share in the credit.
The man of the hour was the principal designer
Architect James Ingo Free.
He and co-designer Kathy Simon had a mission imposed on them by the voters.
They're being sued by the city.
The architect?
Yep.
Where is that?
Failure to, there's a piece of correspondence about it.
Failure to just hide the building properly.
The plans are illegible.
And they've had so many change orders and so many problems with this.
They have no choice but to sue them.
because they can't possibly, it's still, it's not up to Clarkos.
It doesn't meet any in the city.
It's a mess, a total mess.
More than a traditional library.
It also had to reflect in an artistic way both the spirit of the new technological age and the diversity of a changing city.
The building itself is really designed to be people's space.
and it was designed to be space for people, connect with people, and connect with books, connect with computers, connect with resources.
First of all, its function is to bring light into the building.
It's a very big building.
Each floor is about an acre and a third, which is a very big area.
So we have these three entrances, and all of them come to this place of light.
This building is about how light enriches our lives and how a library brings light to the world.
undertaking.
Principal architect James Ingo Freed, who has Parkinson's disease, recently finished the Holocaust Museum in Washington.
He was enthused about building a free library in San Francisco.
Free library.
I learned a free library.
I learned a free library during the
He's sitting in the stacks and hiding out.
He tries to understand what this madness is all about.
Fried designed a complex, transparent building with bridges from one section to another, a metaphor in a city of bridges.
He says it's a speaking person's building.
A building can make you think, it's safe.
A building can make you smile, it's safe.
A building can be part of your life, it's safe.
And just so people will come in, look up and say, wow.
I need to raise money in order to furnish the building.
The bond issue would only pay
We didn't want to actually have chairs or computers, bookshelves.
Any enhancements to the building all had to come from private money.
So we had to find some ways of convincing the public that it should actually give cash to the library.
The message that Coulter and others hit upon was a milestone in the history of fundraising and of this library.
They decided to tap into San Francisco's amazing diversity and to raise funds among what they called affinity groups.
That would be gays and lesbians, African, Latino, Chinese, and Filipino-American, and environmental.
Within the library, centers for each affinity group were planned.
I urge you to be a part of the purpose to help us burn the mortgage on this piece of the library, on this piece of frankly the first pure evidence for a lifetime of our existence and our contribution in the future.
When you go to the African-American room, you must note that when you walk in the room, the building is 16 months old now.
There's a large patch in the carpet.
The carpet was supposed to last 30 years.
It didn't make it through six months, and it's still there.
They never did change it.
There are rips in it, tears.
It's pathetic what's down there.
Look on what's on the shelves.
The African-American community didn't get what they promised them.
Nobody got what they were promised.
But they can count it.
And what it's done is drive stakes through the heart of an institution that's been around for a very long time to serve all people.
And by setting up these special little enclaves, they've created a problem.
We're traveling first class.
We didn't get in at the end of the caboose.
We got in from the beginning, and we're pinning our own way.
It became rather easy to go out to the Filipino-American community and say, here is our chance for a Filipino-American presence, which heretofore had never existed, and to be in an American mainstream cultural institution.
We use a kind of psychological
challenge and say, we occupy 20% of the chicken population.
How can we not do it?
I mean, how do we live with that kind of skill?
The first time that I just go out and I said, well, you know, you could get $5,000 in this human being system.
I mean, for a $5,000.
The affinity centers are carefully planned attractive rooms.
This one, for gay and lesbian correction, received almost double the goal, a total of nearly $3 million.
San Francisco philanthropist James Hormel donated half a million dollars for a project unlike any the gay community had supported before.
They had to take the doors off because they promised them a librarian.
The doors were on there and locked because the books behind there don't belong to the citizens.
They belong to the gay and lesbian community.
When they couldn't provide a librarian,
the gay and lesbian community-making take the doors down.
Now these are custom-made steel doors.
And so the books are in there, but there's no librarian.
Librarians deal with both the lofty and the more practical.
They had to figure out a strategy for a problem with the devil's libraries in all large cities.
The homeless who see a public library as a place to sleep or hang out.
The only issue to us is their behavior.
We do have standard rules of conduct for behavior for everyone, not just homeless.
And we do not allow people to sleep in the building.
Librarian Dowland had a thousand other details to worry about and plan for.
Her new name, in a city whose economy is tied to high-tech Silicon Valley, was designed with a computer in mind.
Every desk has a data port for a laptop.
This patron from Oakland is writing a book on his.
A bank of TV sets and VCRs is constantly in use.
showing educational, informational, and entertainment tapes to anyone, anytime.
The photo collection... That fell apart early.
It's been shut down for about nine months on and off.
It may be on now again, I'm not sure.
But many of these services never materialize or materialize and fail.
...and into computers for easy viewing.
terminals dedicated to specific uses are constantly busy, like this one that helps you buy or sell a new or used car, or this one that assists in a job search.
The library's catalog is now available only on computer, which bothers some librarians and some patrons.
I doubt if I'll ever go into the new library because I'm already uncomfortable because I won't feel that I can walk in and find anything.
I don't know how to use that computer.
I want to talk to a person.
I want to actually touch somebody.
As if to answer hands and spears, librarians have been trained to help the public operate the more than 300 terminals in the library, sometimes in basics, often in searching the internet for needed information.
Hanson still isn't convinced that libraries benefit from high tech.
The one that I grew up in is a grand old lady.
The other is a new kid on the block and we're ready to wait and see which will survive.
Robin Williams for the new Maine Library.
Hello, you're watching TV right now, but I'd like to ask you to see something different.
Book.
Friend.
Many books.
Family.
Come on down next floor.
Tell us this is called New Main Library.
Grand opening celebration on Sunday, April 21st.
Be there.
How do we do it?
Volume!
On opening day, 12,000 people heeded Robin Williams' invitation.
They streamed inside the new building and fanned out to examine the wares and the affinity centers and the same question.
The mayor headed for the children's section, where computers are as popular as Winnie the Pooh.
In a way, the library is using computers and programs popular with kids to get them to read books.
It is also preparing them for life in the increasingly... That has since been proven to be false.
Start them on computers, no good book.
No.
Yeah, well, there was a big story in the Atlantic one.
Areas where jobs are linked not just to leading literacy, but to computer literacy as well.
Marjorie Stern had no trouble finding the book she wanted, a free library in the city.
As the undaunted, tenacious fighter for the new building, she got to check out the first book.
But for the public, it wasn't so easy, at least at first.
Lines were long to check out books and get new library cards.
You sure have Steven Coulter.
We don't have any time he can use in the library a week.
Because I'm not supposed to know this.
But he doesn't have a library card.
The signed books didn't get put back on the shelves quickly.
It looks like there's five individual or 10 cents each, which means five books will return a day late.
In the first few months of operation,
Usage of all aspects of the library, especially the high-tech features, was far heavier than anticipated.
Critics sniped that there wasn't enough shelf space for all the books.
All this put a strain on the staff and on the operating budget.
We have about two and a half million books in our collection, the largest in public libraries in Northern California.
So we have 15 million items that are not catalogued, and we need to get our documents
15 and a half million that are not catalogued.
What did he say?
I'll back it up.
That's okay.
Peace out there.
Staff and the operating budget.
We've got about two and a half million books in our collection, the largest in public libraries in Northern California.
But we also have 16 million items that are not cataloged, and we need to get our documents, get our rare books into the catalog so people can find them and locate them.
To some degree, the new library was a victim of its own success.
Officials say the problems are temporary, but our digital shelf space for new books is already anticipated.
Where are they going to put them?
More importantly, where are the books for the next 20 years if they promised us when they gave the money?
They haven't got room for the books they have, never mind buying anything for the next 20 years.
Now, how is that going to work?
Especially when this was supposed to be twice as big as the old library.
It turns out it's actually smaller.
It's 179,000 square feet of book space.
Architects Simon and Freed have been realized.
This is a building from the 21st century.
They're walking because the site reflects market seats.
which is right at the corner, and thereby reflects also the idea that the building is a building for the next millennium, building for the future, both with a foot in the past and a vision of the future.
A new building, even a beautiful one.